JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: After
the Supreme Court clears the
way, parts of President Trump's
controversial travel
ban go into effect.
Then: Mr. Trump's latest attack
on Twitter aimed at a cable
news anchorwoman brings sharp
criticism for crossing
the line of civility.
And serving a health care
desert -- how one low-income
community in California is using
its local firehouse to
provide affordable care.
KRISTEL ACACIO, Alameda County
Health Care Services Agency:
Fire stations, firefighters
are strategically located
in every community.
So we saw this as an existing,
but perhaps untapped resource
to serve our patient population.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: After months
of legal and political
wrangling, President
Trump's executive order
banning entry into the U.S. from
six Muslim-majority countries
goes into effect tonight.
Earlier this week, the Supreme
Court gave a partial green
light to get started, ordering
those with what it called bona
fide family or business ties
to the U.S. be granted entry.
Last night, the Trump
administration laid out
which connections count.
And joining us to discuss these
guidelines is Yeganeh Torbati.
She covers the State
Department for Reuters.
Yeganeh, welcome
back to the program.
So what is the administration
saying now about who is
permitted in and who isn't?
YEGANEH TORBATI, Reuters: Right.
From these six countries, and
individuals who have certain
family connections, so spouses,
mothers, fathers, children,
siblings, even step-siblings,
they can be allowed in.
The State Department is counting
that as a bona fide connection.
But if you are the grandparents
of a U.S. citizen, for
instance, or the grandchild,
and you are trying to get in
and you're a citizen from one
of these six countries, that
doesn't count in the State
Department, in the U.S.
administration's view.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there
was also a definition of
business relationship.
YEGANEH TORBATI: Right.
So, if you are a student
that has been accepted
into a U.S. university,
someone with an offer
of employment from an American
company, or even a lecturer
coming in to lecture at a
conference, for instance,
or university, you
can be allowed in.
But if are you someone who has
just booked a hotel room or a
tour or something like that,
that does not count.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
those people who were in the
process of trying to get a
visa to come here?
YEGANEH TORBATI: So, any
individual who has been
granted a visa, those
visas are not going
to be revoked.
They are still valid and
they will still be able to
come into the United States.
But there's thousands
potentially of people
who had applied for
visas, they were waiting
to hear back.
Those individuals,
we're not exactly sure.
But I think that is going to
be something that now consulate
officers will have to take
into account these guidelines
when they are assessing, are
they actually going to give
that visa to that person or not?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Yeganeh, did
the administration explain how
it made this dividing line when
it comes to family
relationships?
YEGANEH TORBATI: It seemed
a little bit arbitrary
from the outside.
What the administration said
today to reporters is that they
looked at guidelines that they
have from the Immigration
Nationality Act, which is the
main U.S. law that governs U.S.
immigration.
And they said that that is how
they are going to assess which
family relationships count
and which don't.
Critics, of course, say
that they're still hewing
this line very narrowly,
they're interpreting
the Supreme Court ban narrowly,
the Supreme Court ruling
narrowly, so that they can let
in as few people as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So we know this
has been subject to litigation.
Is it expected there are
going to be more lawsuits
or does this settle it?
YEGANEH TORBATI: We haven't
seen people, and refugee groups
or institutions like the ACLU
running yet saying that they
are going to be suing over
this or filing new complaints.
It is certainly a possibility.
One other thing to mention
is that the administration
seems to be very narrowly
interpreting which
refugees it's going to let in.
It is saying that just having a
relationship to a resettlement
agency is not enough, and
therefore any additional
refugees that will be
coming in this year
will have to have some
family relationship
in the United States.
The refugee groups are
very upset about that.
They think that that violates
the spirit, if not the letter
of the Supreme Court's order.
And that is something that
we're going to see if there
is going to be litigation or
not.
It doesn't seem like
as of yet there's been
any complaints filed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
Yeganeh Torbati with
Reuters, thanks very much.
This goes into effect
tonight at 8:00 Eastern.
YEGANEH TORBATI: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We thank you.
YEGANEH TORBATI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news: Republicans in the
U.S. House of Representatives
pushed through two bills
on illegal immigration.
One toughens prison terms
for deportees who reenter
the U.S. illegally.
The other blocks some
federal funds to so-called
sanctuary cities that
refuse to assist immigration
officials.
The secretary of homeland
security and congressional
Democrats traded
arguments today over that
second bill.
JOHN KELLY, U.S. Homeland
Security Secretary: The
word sanctuary calls
to mind some place
safe.
But too often for families
and victims affected
by illegal immigrant
crime, sanctuary cities
are anything but safe.
Instead, these cities are places
that allow some criminal go
free, undermine federal law
enforcement and make our
communities less safe.
REP.
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT (D), New
York: A sanctuary city is a city
that allows a mom to take her
kid to school without being
fearful that the principal will
call Homeland Security on her.
It allows a domestic
violence victim the ability
to go to the local precinct
and report a batterer.
It is a safety net for people
that are part of our family.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The bills
now move to the Senate,
but it's not clear that
either can pass there.
Senate Republican leaders
struggled again today to revise
their health care bill, and
win enough Republican
votes to pass it.
Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell said there's been
-- quote -- "good progress."
But Senator Susan Collins
of Maine warned that the
bill needs a major overhaul.
Also today, further analysis by
the Congressional Budget Office
found the bill would cut federal
Medicaid spending by 35
percent over 20 years.
A top Vatican official, Cardinal
George Pell, was charged today
with sexual assault in his
native Australia.
He's the top financial
adviser to Pope Francis,
and the highest-ranking
Vatican official implicated
in the long-running scandal
of clergymen abusing children.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television News has our report.
SHANE PATTON, Commissioner,
Victoria State Police: Cardinal
Pell is facing multiple charges,
in respect to historic
sexual offenses.
And there are multiple
complaints relating
to those charges.
JONATHAN MILLER: Last year, the
former archbishop of Melbourne
and Sydney, who is now one of
the pope's top advisers,
testified to a royal commission
investigating child sex abuse.
The commission found
shocking levels of abuse
by the clergy over decades.
Pell supported, by bishops as
a man of integrity, conceded
institutional errors, but denied
any sexual offenses himself.
News from Australia reached the
Vatican overnight, and before
dawn on the fifth day of Saints
Peters and Paul, Cardinal Pell
released his first statement,
saying he would return home
next month to clear his name.
Then early this morning,
he spoke to the press.
CARDINAL GEORGE PELL, Vatican
Treasurer: I am looking forward
finally to having my day
in court.
I am innocent of these charges.
They are false.
The whole idea of sexual
abuse is abhorrent to me.
JONATHAN MILLER: Pope Francis,
who Pell said he talked things
over with, later presided
over mass in St. Peter's Square.
Aussies in the square
today wanted God's
truth to shine through.
WOMAN: Well, there's been a
lot of bad press about Pell
in the Australian media.
He is not very well-liked.
And a lot of people
are very angry that
the church in Australia
didn't do enough to cover
any of the sex abuse
for many years.
JONATHAN MILLER: A song
by musician Tim Minchin
which pleaded with
the ailing cardinal to
return to Australia to testify
to the royal commission
went viral last year.
Now Cardinal George Pell,
ordained 51 years ago, is coming
home to face his accusers.
He will appear before
Melbourne Magistrates'
Court on the 18th of July.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That report
from Jonathan Miller of
Independent Television News.
In Russia, five men were found
guilty today in the murder of
opposition leader Boris Nemtsov
in 2015.
One was the man who pulled
the trigger, a former security
officer in the Chechnya region.
But Nemtsov's allies say that
authorities have done nothing
to find out who ordered
the killing.
President Trump will come face
to face with Russian President
Vladimir Putin next week,
for the first time
since taking office.
The White House and the Kremlin
announced today that they
will meet on the sidelines
of the G20 summit in Germany.
Meanwhile, Syria and Russian
accused the U.S. today of
making baseless allegations that
Damascus is preparing
a new chemical attack.
The White House issued
the warning on Tuesday.
Today, Syrian state TV today
called the accusation - -
quote -- "devoid of truth."
The Russian Foreign Ministry
accused the U.S. of trying to
destabilize the Syrian regime.
MARIA ZAKHAROVA, Russian Foreign
Ministry (through translator):
The goal of it is obvious:
to reanimate the theme
of so-called crimes of
the government and to
return the situation
in Syria to the same dead end
where it has been led by the
West, saying that Assad needs
to leave.
At the same time, it's
a provocation for the
rebels to commit crimes
linked to mass deaths
of civilians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The State
Department dismissed
the comments from both
governments and said
there's no doubt the Syrian
regime has used chemical
weapons in the past.
Back in this country,
the Federal Bureau
of Justice statistics
reports that most hate
crimes over the past
decade went unreported.
That's based on a
survey of households.
It found an average of
250,000 hate crimes each
year between 2004 and 2015.
More than half were
not reported, most
often because they were
handled some other way.
The report says that others
decided the incidents
were not important,
or they doubted police
would do anything.
More than 800 firefighters
are now battling a Northern
Arizona wildfire that's scorched
almost 39 square miles.
Officials say that lighter
winds today would help them make
progress on the Goodwin Fire.
Already, evacuations for
one small town outside
Prescott have been lifted.
Major wildfires are also
burning in Utah, Southern
California and Washington state.
Dozens of employees at The New
York Times staged a walkout
today against a new round
of job cuts.
Reporters and editors tweeted
pictures of staffers leaving,
as well as signs in support
of the staff.
The newspaper is considering
restructuring the newsroom,
and possibly laying off half
of its copy editors.
And on Wall Street, technology
stocks took another hit, and
pulled the broader market
down.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost 167 points
to close at 21287.
The Nasdaq fell 90, and
the S&P 500 gave up 21.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how does President Trump's
latest Twitter attack fit
the character of the American
presidency and does it matter?;
ISIS loses its birthplace
mosque where it declared
a caliphate three years
ago; firehouses step
up to provide health
care for those who need
it most; and much more.
President Trump's use of
Twitter has often brought praise
from supporters for reaching
out directly to the
American people.
But Mr. Trump has also
managed to spark controversy
in 140 characters,
and, today, his tweets
prompted some of the
harshest criticism yet.
Our John Yang has more.
MIKA BRZEZINSKI,
Co-Host, "Morning Joe":
President Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: As Mika Brzezinski
wrapped up her MSNBC show this
morning, President Trump had
a few choice words for her
and co-host Joe Scarborough.
Mr. Trump said the hosts, whom
he called "low I.Q. Crazy Mika
and Psycho Joe," were speaking
badly of him, even though
they insisted on joining
him at Mar-a-Lago.
Mr. Trump adding that, at the
time, Brzezinski was "bleeding
badly from a face-lift."
Within minutes, Brzezinski
responded, resurrecting
the little hands insult
that had been directed
at him during the 2016
presidential primaries.
Mr. Trump's words ignited
a firestorm, even from
his Republican allies.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R),
South Carolina: I thought
it was inappropriate,
beneath the office,
and not helpful.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: I wish,
I wish he hadn't made the tweet.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of
the House: I don't see that
as an appropriate comment.
I think, look, what we're trying
to do around here is improve
tone, the civility of debates.
And this obviously
doesn't help do that.
QUESTION: Did you see the
president's tweets about
Mika Brzezinski this morning?
Do you have any
reaction to that?
SEN.
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO (R),
West Virginia: Distasteful.
JOHN YANG: And from Democrats.
REP.
BRENDA LAWRENCE (D),
Michigan: This is not
acceptable, Mr. President.
JOHN YANG: Principal Deputy
White House Press Sarah Huckabee
Sanders insisted the president
was just defending himself.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
I don't think that it's a
surprise to anybody that
he fights fire with fire.
But he's not going to sit back
and be attacked by the liberal
media, Hollywood elites, and
when they hit him,
he's going to hit back.
JOHN YANG: It recalled
Mr. Trump's past comments
about women, in 2015,
talking about journalist
Megyn Kelly, then of FOX
News, after she moderated
the first Republican debate.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: She gets out
and she starts asking me all
sorts of ridiculous questions,
and, you know, you could see
there was blood coming out of
her eyes, blood coming
out of her whatever.
But she was -- in my
opinion, she was off-base.
JOHN YANG: "Rolling
Stone" quoted him saying
of rival candidate
Carly Fiorina: "Look at
that face.
Would anyone vote for that?"
And there was the 2005
"Access Hollywood" tape.
DONALD TRUMP: I just
start kissing them.
It's like a magnet, kiss, kiss.
I don't even wait.
And when you're a star,
they let you do it.
You can do anything.
Grab them by the
(EXPLETIVE DELETED).
You can do anything.
JOHN YANG: Name-calling was a
staple of Mr. Trump's campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: Lyin'
Ted Cruz came today.
I watched little Marco.
I would say the co-founder would
be crooked Hillary Clinton.
JOHN YANG: And it continued
today, as the president of
the United States taunted two
cable television hosts.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more now on
the president's comments today
and earlier and the implications
of what he says publicly,
we turn to Matthew Dowd.
He's the former chief strategist
for President George W. Bush
in 2004 and author of "A New
Way: Embracing the Paradox
as We Lead and Serve."
And Beverly Gage, she's
professor of American
history at Yale University.
And we welcome both of you
back to the "NewsHour."
Matt Dowd, I'm going
to start with you.
We know we have seen
politicians get into some
tough language over the years.
How does what we heard from
President Trump today on
Twitter fit into all of that?
MATTHEW DOWD, Former Bush
Campaign Strategist: Well, we
have come a long way from when I
worked for George W. Bush in
2000, when he pledged to bring
honor and dignity back to
the Oval Office and won as that
as being part of his platform.
Judy, I think this
is a bigger problem.
First, as you know, in this
democracy, in order to have
a healthy democracy, we have
to get to the common good.
But the only way to get to
the common good is if we have
a common set of facts, which
we don't seem to have
today, and we have a
common level of decency.
And my problem with the
president and what happened
today and why I think it affects
the country as a whole
is, first, we bring up
our kids better than this.
We teach them not to do this.
We tell them not to do
this, and it is not the
right standard of behavior.
But for a president -- secondly,
but, for a president, he
sets the pattern of behavior
for the entire country and what
we can expect for how we each
other act and how we should
be in politics.
And, third, just from
a practical aspect of
it, just totally looking
at it pragmatically,
his behavior in this, in the
midst of what he is trying
to do on health care and the
votes he is trying to get, is
incredibly counterproductive.
So, from all of those avenues,
one from a history of our
democracy that is dependent
on a level of decency
that doesn't seem to
be apparent here, but,
two, just practically,
if he wants to get something
done, this makes it harder.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I
want to ask you about that
latter part in a moment.
But, Beverly Gage, how does what
this president is saying when
these kinds of tweets go out,
how does it compare from
what we have heard from
other presidents over time?
BEVERLY GAGE, Yale University:
Unfortunately, I don't think
that American presidents have
always lived up to the standard
of decency that we have
tended to expect of them, but
I think presidents before Trump,
when those moments happened,
they tended to be the exception,
rather than the rule.
So there was a famous moment
in 1950 when Harry Truman was
president, and a music critic
wrote a very critical piece
about Truman's daughter, who had
just given a singing recital.
And Truman fired off this
ferocious letter threatening to
punch the guy out, and telling
him that he was a gutter
snipe and an idiot and he was
going to kick him in the nuts.
Right?
So, it was pretty
aggressive language.
And there was a big reaction to
that at the time, a president
kind of attacking a private
citizen.
Many people thought
it wasn't dignified.
But nobody would have said
that this is Harry Truman's
mode of being all the time.
It was seen as a kind
of authentic moment of
outrage, and not a kind
of permanent presidential
style.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt
Dowd, is there a level
of dignity that Americans
expect from a president?
I mean, is there a defined
or undefined line over which
presidents shouldn't go?
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, Americans
expect our president to be human
beings, and as imperfect as all
of us are.
They expect us to make
mistakes and all that.
But one thing the American
public likes is, if you make a
mistake, you do that, you cross
that line that they expect
you to behave under,
then you apologize or
then you correct that
behavior and said you have
learned, you are going to do
better, you are going to achieve
better, and you are
going to serve a higher
purpose than that.
Let's keep in mind that
Donald Trump didn't
win because of himself.
He won in spite of himself.
A quarter of his voters
voted for Donald Trump
believing he wasn't
presidential and he didn't
have the temperament, but they
had hope that he would grow
into the office and become more
presidential.
That doesn't seem to have
happened, and I don't think it
will happen for a 71-year-old
man.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Beverly,
you know, apropos of what just
Matt just said and what you said
a moment ago, clearly, there
are moments when presidents
have grown angry, they have been
upset because they
have been criticized.
So is there some kind of
standard, written or otherwise,
for how a president is to speak
to the American people?
BEVERLY GAGE: I don't think
there is a written standard,
but I think up until this moment
there have been some
sort of accepted norms
that the president in
particular -- on the
campaign trail, it's
one thing, right?
That is a place where people
attack each other when they have
differences of opinion or maybe
even personal attacks
in that venue.
It is sort of expected.
There, Trump took it to a
new level as well, I think.
But when you are the president,
the idea that you cannot rise
to the office, that you would
attack private citizens, I think
that that is something that a
lot of people find troubling
and sort of unworthy
of the office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Dowd,
clearly this was part and parcel
of the president lashing out
at the news media.
He was reacting to, I guess,
some of the conversation
this morning on that
program, on cable news.
But what is it that the
president -- in any way
does this further the
agenda of the president?
You mentioned a minute ago
his health care plan, the fact
that he is trying to get this
health care plan through the
Senate, through the Congress,
and this takes all the attention
away from that.
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, I
think attributing any
every time somebody --
Donald Trump does this,
President Trump does
this, people attribute
some grand strategy.
I think what the president
really has is a lack
of impulse control.
He has done this throughout,
and it has actually
hurt him in the process.
He won the election,
but, as I say, he won
it in spite of himself.
Keep in mind, Judy, that there's
votes, three key votes that
are needed in the health care
plan, Shelley Moore Capito, Lisa
Murkowski, and Susan Collins.
And he attacks a woman
basically in a sexist way.
You can't argue any otherwise
in the midst of this, a woman
who serves as an anchor on
a television program.
None of that is going to be
helpful in getting those votes.
So, I think it is
counterproductive.
But anybody that goes to Donald
Trump, first of all, nobody
seems like they go to Trump
to correct his behavior.
But anyone that goes to Donald
Trump would have to make the
argument, this doesn't help
you.
I don't think
Donald Trump cares.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Beverly
Gage, does history
shows that Americans are
forgiving of a president
when they, I don't know,
go off the rails or however
you want to describe this?
BEVERLY GAGE: Well, I think
Americans have often warmed
to a kind of pugilistic style.
So Trump is not the first
president to kind of marshal
this hyper-masculinity, right?
You think of someone
like Theodore Roosevelt
bringing wrestlers into
the White House, et
cetera, or even a figure like
Ronald Reagan, who we tend to
have a much more benign view
of now, but actually
could be quite aggressive
in his rhetoric.
I think what is different for
Trump is that he is specifically
demeaning women, and he's
demeaning particular women.
It's hard to see how that is
going to be a benefit to him.
On the other hand I do think
the record is that often this
has worked as a kind of form
of entertainment.
Certainly, it is one of the
things that people liked about
Teddy Roosevelt, this kind of
man who wasn't going
to take it from anyone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
BEVERLY GAGE: So, unfortunately,
I don't think it's clear that
this is going to be something
that there is a lot
of incentive to stop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt, what does
this mean for the president and
his allies in the Republican
Party?
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, I'm just
going to -- one response is,
is, yes, the president -- yes,
the American public
loves a fighter, but they
want a fighter that is
fighting on their behalf,
not on their own behalf.
So, he has not
connected the dots.
And these tweets are no
connection, as we talked about.
It is going to actually make
it worse for him to achieve
any legislative platform, as
opposed to better.
There is no connection in
fighting on Americans' behalf.
I think you saw today,
and as your piece laid
out, is Republicans
are upset about this,
they have grown weary of
this, they know it has made
it more difficult on them.
And I think, as his numbers, as
his approval numbers continue
to drop -- they're at the
lowest level of any president
in his first term or any -- in
any term at this point without
a scandal involved -- I think
it makes it much harder and
it sets up a problem for the
midterm elections in 2018.
And I think all of that,
Republicans are nervous about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But quickly,
Matt, they are still sticking
with him for the most part,
aren't they?
MATTHEW DOWD: For the most part.
And I think that is one of the
frustrations by many of us.
I think you can say, oh, just
discount his words and all that.
At some point, they are
going to have to hold Donald
Trump's feet to the fire.
And they can do that.
Senators can do that and
House members can do it.
They can basically say,
we are not going to
pass an appointment, we
are not going to pass
legislation until you
correct your behavior.
There is no way right
now we know, or there
is no evidence that we
have that they're willing
to do that.
But that is in the end what
they have control over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're right.
We have not seen that yet.
Matthew Dowd, Beverly
Gage, we thank you both.
The battle for the largest
city held by ISIS appears
close to being over.
Iraqi government forces captured
an ancient landmark in the
old city of Mosul today, a
significant symbolic victory.
The militants now hold
very little territory in
the city, once home to
one-and-a-half million
Iraqis.
William Brangham reports.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For
Iraqi forces, it's clearly
a major victory after
months of block-by-block
fighting.
They have recaptured Western
Mosul's al-Nuri Mosque compound,
and what remains of its 12th
century minaret.
HASSAN SALEH JABER, Iraqi
Military (through translator):
We stormed the area in the early
hours of the morning from
different directions.
We stormed the mosque and
secured the area, and operations
are going on to fully clear
and search the area.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The compound
was blown up by ISIS fighters
last week as they retreated,
but that did little to diminish
the symbolism of today's events.
In a statement, Iraqi Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi said:
"It marks the end of the ISIS
state of falsehood."
In July 2014, the ISIS
leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi,
stood in the al-Nuri
Mosque just weeks after
his forces seized the city
and announced the formation of
a so-called caliphate across
much of Iraq and Syria.
ABU BAKR AL-BAGHDADI, ISIS
Leader (through translator):
God has granted your brothers,
the mujahideen, victory and a
conquest after years of patience
and holy struggle, and enabled
them to achieve their objective.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There
have been recent claims
from the Russians and the
Iranians that al-Baghdadi
has been killed, but the
U.S. hasn't confirmed that.
Now his group now holds
less than one square
mile of territory in
the western half of the
city.
Part of Mosul's Old City remains
under ISIS control, as does a
key nearby hospital complex.
U.S. Army Colonel Ryan Dillon
is a spokesman for the coalition
that's supporting Iraqi
forces, the ISF.
COL.
RYAN DILLON, Operation
Inherent Resolve Spokesman:
The Old City still remains
a difficult, dense,
suffocating fight.
Tight alleyways with
booby-traps, civilians,
and ISIS fighters
around every corner make
the ISF's advance
extremely challenging.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last October,
Iraqi units and their allies
opened the campaign to retake
Mosul, and captured
the eastern half of the
city by late January.
The assault on Western
Mosul began in February.
Even now, it's believed
thousands of people are
still trapped there.
MAN (through translator):
Yes, there many families there
still, hundreds of families
all around.
It's miserable.
There is no bread
or water at all.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These months
of battle have displaced
more than 850,000 people.
Hundreds arrived today at a
processing center run by Iraqi
forces as they attempted to flee
for refugee camps.
Military trucks carried
men, women and children
out, as others tried
to make their way back
in to newly reclaimed areas.
MAN (through translator): Our
neighborhood was liberated
more than three months ago.
We fled even before the
liberation of our neighborhood
and ISIS was chasing us from
house to house.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
in Syria, U.S.-backed
Kurdish fighters have
seized the last road
into Raqqa, the Islamic State's
self-proclaimed capital.
The Syrian Democratic Forces
are now in control of all
major routes into the city.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a health
care story about providing
help to those who need it most.
Even as the debate over
replacing the Affordable
Care Act continues,
one California city has
come up with an
innovative solution to
an intractable problem.
Special correspondent
Kathleen McCleery reports
from Alameda County.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: On the south
edge of the city of Hayward sits
a neighborhood with especially
high rates of poverty,
unemployment and violent crime.
People are sicker, too.
Many suffer from
diabetes, obesity, asthma
and other ailments.
Options for care
here are limited.
There's just one hospital,
and few doctors welcome
Medicaid patients.
Some call it a
health care desert.
ALEX BRISCOE, Former Director,
Alameda County Health Care
Services: South Hayward is the
poster child for lack of
access to primary care.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: When Alex
Briscoe was with Alameda County
Health Care Services -- he
was agency director for six
years -- he hunted for ways
to improve access to care.
In 2009, as he coped with the
swine flu, or H1N1, epidemic,
Briscoe had a light bulb moment.
ALEX BRISCOE: Firefighters
joined our public health nurses
and many other providers, and
we very successfully
vaccinated, immunized hundreds
of thousands of people.
MAN: Airway aids
and tracheal tubes.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Briscoe
wondered if firefighters
skilled as trained
paramedics could help solve
another piece of the
health care puzzle.
ALEX BRISCOE: This H1N1
experience, combined with our
already robust relationship with
fire on the EMS system,
it's kind of like peanut
butter and chocolate.
Do these two ideas go together,
and is there a way for us
to use this already existing
resource and preexisting
trust as well?
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Trust,
because approval ratings for
firefighters far exceed other
public servants.
That got officials here
thinking about how to leverage
manpower and location.
Kristel Acacio runs special
projects for the county agency.
KRISTEL ACACIO, Alameda County
Health Care Services Agency:
Fire stations, firefighters
are strategically located
in every community.
So we saw this as an existing,
but perhaps untapped resource
to serve our patient population.
Around the fire station,
there is a concentration
of low-income residents.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: When Acacio
examined data about that
population, she discovered that
the neediest area was just
where the county planned to
build a new fire station.
KRISTEL ACACIO: And what we
can see in this map is that
in Hayward, and in particular
in South Hayward, that
the concentration of
avoidable emergency
department visits is 1.5
times or greater
the county rate.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: County
health officials seized the
chance to collaborate with the
city, a community health center
and a nonprofit architectural
firm to design and build two
structures on the same campus.
They opened in late 2015.
The clinic is right in
front of us, and the fire
station is right here.
GARRETT CONTRERAS, Hayward Fire
Chief: Yes, the same style.
They look integrated, and
basically taking advantage of
that sort of known trust and
location.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Fire
chief Garrett Contreras was
a supporter from the start.
GARRETT CONTRERAS: Upwards of
70 percent of our 911 calls
in the Hayward Fire Department
are for medical emergencies.
Some of these more routine-type
medical problems can be treated
at a much lower-cost setting
and keep the emergency
room beds available for
our most critical patients.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Reducing
the number of transports to
the E.R. is one way to measure
success, says David B.
Vliet, CEO of the Tiburcio
Vasquez Health Center,
which runs eight community
clinics, including this one.
DAVID B. VLIET, CEO, Tiburcio
Vasquez Health Center: Because
we have delivered 6,000 urgent
care, convenient care visits
here, those are visits that
didn't go to the E.R., so right
away we know we have
kept that volume out
of the emergency room.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: But
not everything went
according to plan.
KRISTEL ACACIO: Initially, what
we wanted the firefighters to
do was that we could possibly
dedicate a couple paramedics
to actually work in the clinic.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: That idea
was quickly squelched by the
California Nurses Association.
Karen Rothblatt has been
a nurse for 30 years.
KAREN ROTHBLATT, California
Nurses Association: You wouldn't
want me to come and respond to
you in that critical
first moment.
It's not what my
training is about.
Same, turn that around, I
think you could say that a
paramedic hasn't been trained to
do what a nurse has been
trained to do, so why would
you have them do that?
I think it would be
putting people at risk.
ALEX BRISCOE: My first thought
is the "Family Feud sound.
Look, no nurse would say that
while a paramedic is trache-ing
them or starting an I.V. line
Paramedics are extremely highly
trained, and highly skilled,
and I think that they can
do far more than what they're
currently doing, if we remember
that the point of our health
care delivery system is to
serve people, not to protect
health care market share.
KAREN ROTHBLATT: Well, I find
that insulting, actually.
There are jobs out
there for nurses.
It's not about that.
It's really, really about
making sure that that clinic
really functions in a way that
is best for the patients
that arrive there.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: At
the clinic, patients
are seen by a nurse
practitioner or physician's
assistant.
No doctor is on staff
yet, but they say they
are hiring one soon.
Firefighters are close by if
the clinic needs lifesaving
care for heart attacks, strokes
or to get patients to a
fully staffed emergency room.
And proximity promotes
communication, too.
Those in the field, like Captain
LaShon Earnest, encourage
people to use the clinic.
CAPT.
LASHON EARNEST, Hayward
Fire Department: We go on
a lot of calls where we
can make a determination
where somebody who doesn't
necessarily need to go
to the emergency room,
the tax the system.
For something -- say,
for a stubbed toe, this
is someone that could
probably use the clinic.
Well, did you know the
clinic was right next
door to the firehouse?
Oh, I didn't know that.
OK.
Well, maybe I'm fine
right now, I don't need
to go to the hospital.
I will have my mother drive
me tomorrow to the clinic.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Tina
Greives lost her insurance
after an on-the- job
injury as a long-distance
trucker.
For her, the location, next to
the fire station, is convenient.
TINA GREIVES, Patient: I don't
have a vehicle, which is unusual
for somebody in California.
This one is just seriously
within walking distance if
I'm doing good, or a 15-minute
bus ride.
So, it's in a perfect location.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Greives,
like most treated in this
clinic, qualifies for Medicaid.
More than 120,000 people in
Alameda County were added to
the rolls with the passage of
the Affordable Care Act.
The uncertainty over health
care in Washington is causing
worry here in South Hayward.
Cuts to Medicaid could reduce
a key funding stream for this
clinic, keeping it from being
self-sustaining in
the coming years.
And that's a concern for
providers and patients alike.
TINA GREIVES: I wouldn't
be covered by the new bill.
That's all there is to it, and
it's just like, holy dirty word.
So, it's an uncertainty,
and it's scary.
DAVID B. VLIET: Ultimately, it
means that more folks cannot
be seen in a health center
like this, and would
not have a paying source
in order to do that.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The
partnership of firefighters
and health care workers
is a first for California.
ALEX BRISCOE: The attempt to
bridge the 911 system and the
primary care system, I think
that's a unique experiment.
GARRETT CONTRERAS: I do
believe it can be a model.
I do believe it will
be -- can be repeated.
It's not easy.
Not so easy to do to get
multiple governmental
agencies to work together,
drop the boundaries,
drop the egos, drop the who said
what, who's doing what, who's
getting credit for anything,
and just do it because
it's the right thing
to do and it'll improve
service to the community.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: I'm Kathleen
McCleery for the "PBS NewsHour"
in Hayward, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
why a deadly disaster is
bringing to light the problem
of gas and oil wells near homes;
and journalist Ann Friedman
gives her Brief But Spectacular
take on finding her voice.
But first: A key part of
President Trump's campaign was
pledging to restore prosperity
and to ease the anxiety
for those left behind
by globalization.
Income inequality was a
problem during President
Obama's tenure, too.
The trend began well
before either took office.
And the widening gap here
is connected to growth in
other parts of the world.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, has been exploring
those trends, and it's
the focus of his weekly
segment, Making Sense.
BRANKO MILANOVIC, City
University of New York:
The good news is that
people around this point
A, like one third of the
global population, have
done really quite well.
PAUL SOLMAN: At the
City University of New
York Graduate Center,
economist Branko Milanovic
and the hottest curve
in economics right now,
charting the climb of a
billion out of poverty,
and explaining the rise of
China, the rise of populism
in Europe, the rise of Donald
Trump.
And thanks to its pachydermal
profile, and Twitter, it has
an almost unforgettable name:
the Elephant Chart.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: I remember
in June 2012, the first time
that I saw what later became
the Elephant Chart, I
was immediately struck,
because I thought, well,
that's exactly what
we all knew.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what
is it that we knew?
BRANKO MILANOVIC: Well, we knew
that China and large groups
of people in Asia who were
not very rich compared
to Americans, who
have done very well.
We knew that lower- and
middle-class Americans
and Japanese and Germans
have not done well,
and then we also knew that
the top 1 percent in the rich
countries have done well.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, at the risk
of Dumbo-ing this down, let's
take the Elephant Chart from
tail to tusk.
For that, we have to head
into the wild blue yonder
of my producer's basement.
On the bottom, the horizontal
axis is the entire world
population, arranged by their
incomes back in 1988, poorest
over here to the left,
the richest to the right.
Just past the middle, at
about the 55th percentile,
a family of four with
$3,000 a year after-tax
income.
Middle-class U.S. family taking
home $30,000 a year would
land about here, at the 80th
percentile.
And in 1988, $160,000 of
after-tax income would've lifted
you into the global 1 percent.
On the vertical axis, going
from bottom to top, is how
much income grew, in percentage
terms, over 20 years,
from 1988 to 2008.
The two winning groups,
the fabled 1 percent and
those in the middle of
the income distribution.
As for the poorest, they
had about a 10 percent rise.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: If they
started with like $2 a day,
now they have $2.3 a day.
PAUL SOLMAN: But now what
this story is telling us
is, here, at the middle
of the income distribution
globally, those people have
almost doubled their income
in real terms after taxes.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: Right.
Right.
After taxes, yes.
And as you can see, this is
not a small group of people.
So we are talking about
people from the 40th
percentile to the 70th.
So this is almost like one-third
of the global population who
have done really quite well.
PAUL SOLMAN: And who are
we talking about here?
These are the Indians in
Bangalore, the Brazilian
middle class, the South
Koreans, the Chinese,
who've flocked from the
countryside to the cities.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: There was
a large chunk of people,
two-and-a-half billion, who have
done extremely well.
PAUL SOLMAN: And those are
the people up at the top of
the back of the elephant.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: Top of
the back of the elephant,
so basically what is
called resurgent Asia.
PAUL SOLMAN: Resurgent
Asia, indeed.
Now, you may have seen
one of the most popular
Ted Talks of all time.
HANS ROSLING, Swedish Academic:
Income per person on this
axis, poor down here, rich
up there.
PAUL SOLMAN: The late great
Hans Rosling depicting
this phenomenon in his
own inimitably graphic
way.
HANS ROSLING: You see
China under foreign
domination actually
lowered their income and
came down to the Indian level
here, whereas U.K. and United
States is getting richer and
richer, and after Second
World War, United States
is richer than U.K.
But independence is coming here.
Growth is starting,
economic reform.
Growth is faster.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, the good news
is that income inequality has,
from a global perspective,
gone down, as the incomes in
the developing world rise,
catching up with incomes in the
developed world.
And that's a point the Elephant
Chart is often used to make.
But perhaps the chart's most
memorable message of the moment
is the crisis of inequality
in the very well-developed
world, the hollowing
out of the middle class
in France, the United
Kingdom and especially the
United States of America.
Here, at incomes of about
$20,000 to $100,000 a
year, inflation-adjusted,
there's been negligible
income growth for decades.
Once you get to the 70th
percentile, so you're
the richest 30 percent
of the world's income
distribution, it
falls off a cliff.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: True.
It was really people who
are generally dissatisfied
with their economic
position and who feel
threatened by migration and
who feel threatened by lack
of jobs or insecurity of jobs.
And you look at actually who
are voting for Le Pen in France,
who voted for Brexit, and
then -- and Trump, we saw
that this sort of growth of
right-wing populism is driven on
one hand by this insecurity
of jobs, which is a result of
globalization, and by migration,
which is also part and
parcel of globalization.
PAUL SOLMAN: And globalization
was supposed to be win-win
for everyone, wasn't it?
BRANKO MILANOVIC: One thing was
promised to them essentially,
with globalization, they
would all get better off.
And then gradually they see
that their wages are stagnant,
and they have been stagnant
for 25 years.
PAUL SOLMAN: The rich getting
richer, the trunk of the
elephant tilted skyward.
And then, of course, you look
backwards, and then you see that
these people might be catching
up to you.
BRANKO MILANOVIC: Yes, right,
because they actually are
coming on the big tide, like
a wave, and then really your
relative position is going to
really slide down quite quickly.
PAUL SOLMAN: And so we end
with the jumbo takeaway, that
while a rising middle class
in the developing world has
been narrowing global inequality
for decades, the story has
been just the opposite closer to
home, and fueling a reaction as
radical as it is understandable.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from
the City University of New York
and my producer's basement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're
just glad you're safe, Paul.
And there's more of
Paul's conversation
with economist Branko
Milanovic on our Web site.
You can find it at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Colorado is taking a close
look at all oil and gas
operations across the state.
That follows a fatal explosion
in April at home in the Denver
suburb of Firestone caused
by a leaking
underground gas line.
Tomorrow is the deadline set
by the governor for companies
to complete inspection of oil
and gas lines all near
homes and businesses.
The accident has revived the
debate over how drilling can
coexist with growing suburban
development.
Dan Boyce with Public Media's
Inside Energy reports.
GAYLE MERTZ, Firestone
Resident: I don't have the
vocabulary to describe it.
It was just a massive,
massive explosion.
DAN BOYCE: Firestone resident
Gayle Mertz was in her
backyard when it happened.
But neighbors inside
their homes felt it too.
CHILD: Like, our whole house
shook, and like, jumped.
DAN BOYCE: One single blast
leveled the Martinez home
over on Twilight Avenue.
As the home began burning,
parents, including
Laura Goodwin, grabbed
up their children and
evacuated.
LAURA GOODWIN, Firestone
Resident: And, really,
we thought that we
weren't going back.
DAN BOYCE: The blast killed
Mark Martinez and his
brother-in-law Joey Irwin.
Martinez's wife, Erin,
was hospitalized with
serious injuries.
Following the explosion,
Anadarko Petroleum, Colorado's
largest oil producer, announced
it had voluntarily shut
down 3,000 nearby wells.
Within another week, Firestone
Fire Chief Ted Poszywak
confirmed the swirling rumors.
The explosion was caused
by gas that entered the
home through the basement.
TED POSZYWAK, Firestone
Fire Chief: Due to a
cut and abandoned line
attached to an oil
and gas well in the vicinity.
DAN BOYCE: Basically, odorless
gas seeped in through the
basement and the family had
no idea.
It was from a well 178 feet
from the Martinez home.
It's not an uncommon site
in Northern Colorado,
and other parts of the
country, such as Texas
and Pennsylvania, surging
populations leading
to the construction
of new homes near and
on top of land previously the
domain of the oil industry.
The collision of those two
sectors has led to political
uproar in Colorado over the last
few years, communities
banning drilling, judges
throwing out those bans.
State law now requires new
oil wells be drilled at
least 500 feet from homes.
But Lisa McKenzie, a
professor at the University
of Colorado School of
Public Health, has been
researching this for years,
and she says it's not drilling
new wells near homes that's the
only problem.
LISA MCKENZIE, University
of Colorado School of
Public Health: It was
actually more common
for homes to be built
near to where an oil and
gas well already existed.
DAN BOYCE: In fact,
Inside Energy analysis
has found, between 2010
and 2015, the number
of people living in areas
with more than 10 wells per
square mile increased by nearly
50,000 in Colorado, most
noticeably along the Front
Range north of Denver.
And while the state
mandates that 500-foot
setback for new wells,
there's no state regulation
for how far new homes
must be constructed from
already existing oil wells.
Laura Goodwin says she bought
her home with the understanding
that utilities and oil and
gas companies were doing
everything they could to
protect nearby families.
LAURA GOODWIN: That's why they
get to drill, that's why they
get the oil, that's why get
the permits, is because
they are supposed to keep
the people around it safe.
And they didn't do it.
DAN BOYCE: In the wake of
the explosion, Colorado
Governor John Hickenlooper
ordered oil companies
inspect all underground oil
and gas lines within 1,000
feet of occupied buildings.
He says this all used to be
open farmland and the location
of underground oil and gas
pipes was known only to
the oil companies and
the property owners.
GOV.
JOHN HICKENLOOPER (D), Colorado:
And now we can see that
sometimes that property gets
sold, and next thing you
know, you're building
a housing development.
How could we not know where
the flow lines are, have a
map and a record of them?
DAN BOYCE: Hickenlooper
expects GPS data provided
by oil companies through
the required inspections
should allow the state to
provide a comprehensive
map of all flow lines
for the first time.
Anadarko owns the leaking well
responsible for the explosion.
They're holding community
meetings and now offering free
gas detectors to any home in
the neighborhood as
a way to calm fears.
Still, that hasn't stopped
about 100 of these homeowners
from launching lawsuits against
the oil company, as well as
the developer and builder
of the Martinez home.
Anadarko turned down
our interview requests,
but Colorado Oil and Gas
Association president
Dan Haley says, as tragic as
this accident is, the public
can still feel confident in
his industry.
DAN HALEY, President, Colorado
Oil and Gas Association: We
have been operating in Colorado
for longer than we have been
a state, more than 100 years.
We have drilled tens
of thousands of wells.
We have logged millions
of manhours out in
the field working.
And it is a safe industry.
It is not to excuse
what happened.
It is not to forget or pretend
that two people didn't die.
They did.
We need to do all we
can do to make sure it
doesn't happen again.
DAN BOYCE: Some Colorado
lawmakers are now calling for
much larger distances between
homes and wells, something still
staunchly opposed by industry.
And speak to home builders,
they say setbacks like that
are just not practical.
Gregory Miedema works
with a local home builders
trade association.
He says with all the wells,
54,000 active wells statewide,
you can't really go somewhere
where you're not
building next to one.
GREGORY MIEDEMA, Northern
Colorado Home Builders
Association: I mean,
quite frankly, you have
to be prudent and safe about
your distances, but you can't.
If you were to rule out all
the land that were next to a
well, you would rule it all
out.
DAN BOYCE: He says he's
not against any setbacks,
but the more land you
rule out, the more you
raise housing prices
on what's left.
That's the last
thing Colorado needs.
Prices around here are
already rising at some of the
fastest rates in the country.
At least for now, there's
still plenty of demand for
new housing in the area.
In fact, if you look
right behind the site
of the explosion, you
can see construction
of a brand-new apartment
complex, with nearly 300 units.
But leaking gas lines are not
the only hazard, and just five
weeks after the explosion:
WOMAN: We start with breaking
news, explosion and fire at
an oil and gas site once again
rocking Weld County.
DAN BOYCE: Less than four miles
away from the Martinez home,
an Anadarko-owned oil tank
burst into flames.
It happened during
a maintenance check.
This explosion killed one
worker and injured three others.
The oil and gas industry can be
hazardous, 42 deaths nationwide
from fires and explosions
between 2010 and 2014.
But a house explosion
raises whole new fears.
And now it's up to the state
regulators and oil companies
to do whatever they can to make
these residents feel safe
again in their homes.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Dan
Boyce in Firestone, Colorado.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, our Brief
But Spectacular series, where
we ask interesting people to
describe their passions.
Tonight, journalist Ann
Friedman, co-host of
the podcast "Call Your
Girlfriend," explores
why it's important to
find your own voice.
ANN FRIEDMAN, Journalist: Women
are frequently asked to couch
their opinions in a lot of
filler words, which is why
I find it so interesting
that we are simultaneously
seen as unserious
when we use phrases like um,
you know, or like, because,
frankly, if you say things
directly, without a lot of "oh,
you know what I think" sort
of padding around them, it's
difficult for both
men and women to hear.
I don't think it's just men
that have a hard time hearing
direct especially criticism when
it's coming from a woman.
Knowing it doesn't really
change the fact that, like,
in the real world, women have
to do a lot more emotional
labor to convey their opinions
and decisions and ideas.
I am one of those boring people
who has only wanted to do
one thing for my entire life,
which is be a journalist.
It's pretty impossible to equip
someone for a 10-plus-year
career in media right now.
You're going to get fired
or laid off at some point.
It will happen.
And you probably are
going to have to learn
a bunch of new skills.
You probably are going to have
to come to terms with the fact
that you're not only going
to write long-form
magazine articles in the
style of 1960s "Esquire."
I didn't wake up one day
and say, you know what,
I should have a podcast.
I have a good friend
here called Gina Delvac.
She had said for a long time
to me and to my friend Aminatou
Sow, hey, you guys have
a great chemistry, you would
be great podcast co-hosts.
I think it was somewhere around
where we came up with the name.
I guess we just create a fun,
safe place for ourselves and
discuss the things that we are
interested in.
And it turns out that a lot
of other women are interested
in those things, too.
Voice is one of those things
that when you talk about it
in a classroom or with a group
of writers, it can feel
very big and abstract.
I think, when I was earlier in
my career, I had more doubts
about my validity as a writer
and a journalist.
And I made my more effort to
copy the tone of the places
that I was writing for, inasmuch
as they had an
institutional tone.
And the longer that I had been
working and the more confident
in my opinions or my reporting
or, frankly, like, my career
and my place in the world,
it gets easier to write the
way that I speak.
If someone can't hear
the substance of what
I'm saying because of
the tone I say it with
or because of the little filler
words that I use -- which,
P.S., men use, too, we all
use -- then that's
their problem.
My name is Ann Friedman, and
this is my Brief But Spectacular
take on finding your voice
in journalism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just
say it, that's the message.
You can watch additional
Brief But Spectacular
episodes on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
On the "NewsHour" online
right now: Two decades
since her critically
acclaimed first novel,
"The God of Small
Things," Indian writer
Arundhati Roy is out with
another work of fiction.
She offers insight into her
new book, as well as the social
and political backdrop in her
country.
That and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.